pages/install/install.rst, before:

.. title: Installing Cantera
.. slug: index
.. date: 2019-06-26 20:00:00 UTC-04:00
.. description: Installation instructions for Cantera
.. type: text

.. _sec-install:

.. jumbotron::

   .. raw:: html

      <h1 class="display-3">Installing Cantera</h1>

   .. class:: lead

      The following instructions detail how to install the different Cantera interfaces
      on a variety of platforms. We highly recommend that all new users install the
      Python interface via :ref:`Conda <sec-install-conda>`.

Installing the Cantera Python Interface
=======================================

- The easiest way to install the Cantera Python interface on all operating systems is by
  using :ref:`Conda <sec-install-conda>`.

- Windows users can use
  :ref:`MSI installer packages <sec-install-windows>`.

- Ubuntu users can install the ``cantera-python3`` package from the
  :ref:`Cantera PPA <sec-install-ubuntu>`.

- Fedora / Enterprise Linux users can install ``python3-cantera`` using
  :ref:`dnf <sec-install-fedora-rhel>`.

- Gentoo users can install using :ref:`emerge <sec-install-gentoo>`.

- FreeBSD users can install using :ref:`pkg <sec-install-freebsd>`.

- If you want to use the current development version, or add features of your own, you
  should :ref:`compile Cantera from source <sec-compiling>`.

Installing the Cantera Matlab Toolbox
=====================================
- The Cantera Matlab toolbox can be installed on all operating systems using
  :ref:`Conda <sec-install-conda>`.

- Windows users can use :ref:`MSI installer packages <sec-install-windows>`.

- macOS users can also install using a :ref:`.pkg installer <sec-install-macos>`.

- If you want to use the current development version, or add features of your own, you
  should :ref:`compile Cantera from source <sec-compiling>`.

Installing the Cantera C++ Interface & Fortran 90 Module
========================================================
- Ubuntu users can install the ``cantera-dev`` package from the
  :ref:`Cantera PPA <sec-install-ubuntu>`.

- Fedora / Enterprise Linux users can install packages using
  :ref:`yum/dnf <sec-install-fedora-rhel>`.

- Gentoo users can install using :ref:`emerge <sec-install-gentoo>`.

- FreeBSD users can install using :ref:`pkg <sec-install-freebsd>`.

- Users of Windows, macOS, and other Linux distributions should
  :ref:`compile Cantera from source <sec-compiling>`.

Commit message:

Add pip-based installation instructions

pages/install/install.rst, after:

.. title: Installing Cantera
.. slug: index
.. date: 2019-06-26 20:00:00 UTC-04:00
.. description: Installation instructions for Cantera
.. type: text

.. _sec-install:

.. jumbotron::

   .. raw:: html

      <h1 class="display-3">Installing Cantera</h1>

   .. class:: lead

      The following instructions detail how to install the different Cantera interfaces
      on a variety of platforms. We highly recommend that all new users install the
      Python interface via :ref:`Conda <sec-install-conda>`.

Installing the Cantera Python Interface
=======================================

- If you don't already have Python installed (or already use Conda), the easiest way to
  install the Cantera Python interface on all operating systems is by
  using :ref:`Conda <sec-install-conda>`.

- If you already have a different Python installation, Cantera can be installed using
  :ref:`Pip <sec-install-pip>`.

- Ubuntu users can install the ``cantera-python3`` package from the
  :ref:`Cantera PPA <sec-install-ubuntu>`.

- Fedora / Enterprise Linux users can install ``python3-cantera`` using
  :ref:`dnf <sec-install-fedora-rhel>`.

- Gentoo users can install using :ref:`emerge <sec-install-gentoo>`.

- FreeBSD users can install using :ref:`pkg <sec-install-freebsd>`.

- If you want to use the current development version, or add features of your own, you
  should :ref:`compile Cantera from source <sec-compiling>`.

Installing the Cantera Matlab Toolbox
=====================================
- The Cantera Matlab toolbox can be installed on all operating systems using
  :ref:`Conda <sec-install-conda>`.

- Windows users can use :ref:`MSI installer packages <sec-install-windows>`.

- macOS users can also install using a :ref:`.pkg installer <sec-install-macos>`.

- If you want to use the current development version, or add features of your own, you
  should :ref:`compile Cantera from source <sec-compiling>`.

Installing the Cantera C++ Interface & Fortran 90 Module
========================================================
- Ubuntu users can install the ``cantera-dev`` package from the
  :ref:`Cantera PPA <sec-install-ubuntu>`.

- Fedora / Enterprise Linux users can install packages using
  :ref:`yum/dnf <sec-install-fedora-rhel>`.

- Gentoo users can install using :ref:`emerge <sec-install-gentoo>`.

- FreeBSD users can install using :ref:`pkg <sec-install-freebsd>`.

- Users of Windows, macOS, and other Linux distributions should
  :ref:`compile Cantera from source <sec-compiling>`.
