README.md, before:

# Cantera Website

This repository contains the source code for the [cantera.org](https://cantera.org) website. The
site is built using the [Nikola](https://getnikola.com) static site generator.

## To build the website

1. Create a virtual environment for Nikola (i.e., using conda or virtualenv)
2. Clone the Cantera source: `git clone https://github.com/Cantera/cantera.git`
3. Clone the Cantera Jupyter examples: `git clone https://github.com/Cantera/cantera-jupyter.git`
4. Clone the Cantera website source: `git clone https://github.com/Cantera/cantera-website.git`
5. Enter the website repo: `cd cantera-website`
6. Copy the current development documentation: `curl -O https://cantera.org/documentation/dev/dev-docs.tar.bz2`
7. Extract the dev docs: `tar jxf dev-docs.tar.bz2 --strip-components=1 -C api-docs/dev`
8. Inside the website repo, install the required packages: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
9. Build the website and open in browser: `nikola auto -b` or use `nikola serve -p 9000 -b` for different port

## To add a language of examples

1. Copy one of the existing `render_*_examples.py` and `render_*_examples.plugin`
2. Add the source folder as the key and destination folder to the `EXAMPLES_FOLDERS` dictionary in `conf.py`
3. Edit the `render_*_examples.py` file to build the examples
4. See [this blog post](https://bryanwweber.com/writing/personal/2018/12/22/writing-task-plugins-for-nikola/) for more information about building Nikola tasks

## To add an example category for Jupyter or Python

1. New example categories are stored in folders in the Jupyter and Python example repositories
2. If new categories (folders) are added to the examples, the appropriate renderer needs to be updated
3. In the Jupyter and Python examples, there's a dictionary called `*_headers`. Each folder of examples has a key in that dictionary. The values are a nested dictionary with three keys:
   1. `name`: The name used on the index page for that category
   2. `files`: An empty list that gets filled with the names of the examples in this category
   3. `summaries`: A empty dictionary that gets filled with keys that are the example filename and values that are the summary from that example
4. Add a new key to that dictionary with the folder name as the key and fill in the `name` key in the nested dictionary and set the `files` and `summaries` keys to the empty list and empty dictionary, respectively

## To add a version's release notes

* To add the latest version's release notes: `nikola new_release`
* To add release notes for a version by its tag name: `nikola new_release -t {tag_name}`
    - Example: `nikola new_release -t v2.4.0`
* To add release notes for a version by its release ID: `nikola new_release -i {id}`
    - Example: `nikola new_release -i 12508904`

## Cheat sheet for linking to content in various places:
* To link to another section on the same page (using the title of the section):
    `Governing Equations for Single Reactors`_
* To link to an external site:
  * `YAML 1.2 <https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html>`__
* To link to a Python class:
  * :py:class:`ConstPressureReactor`
* To link to a C++ class:
  * `ThermoPhase <{{% ct_docs doxygen/html/dc/d38/classCantera_1_1ThermoPhase.html %}}>`__
* To link to an example:
  * `IC engine example </examples/python/reactors/ic_engine.py.html>`__
* To link to a label in the YAML API docs:
  * :ref:`three-body <sec-yaml-three-body>`
* To link to a class defined in `ctml_writer`:
  * :cti:class:`falloff_reaction`

Commit message:

Add information on testing to README.md

README.md, after:

# Cantera Website

This repository contains the source code for the [cantera.org](https://cantera.org) website. The
site is built using the [Nikola](https://getnikola.com) static site generator.

While the state of the website corresponds to the `main` branch, upcoming changes can
be previewed on [testing.cantera.org](https://testing.cantera.org), which is based on
the `testing` branch of the repository.

## To build the website

1. Create a virtual environment for Nikola (i.e., using conda or virtualenv)
2. Clone the Cantera source: `git clone https://github.com/Cantera/cantera.git`
3. Clone the Cantera Jupyter examples: `git clone https://github.com/Cantera/cantera-jupyter.git`
4. Clone the Cantera website source: `git clone https://github.com/Cantera/cantera-website.git`
5. Enter the website repo: `cd cantera-website`
6. Copy the current development documentation: `curl -O https://cantera.org/documentation/dev/dev-docs.tar.bz2`
7. Extract the dev docs: `tar jxf dev-docs.tar.bz2 --strip-components=1 -C api-docs/dev`
8. Inside the website repo, install the required packages: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
9. Build the website and open in browser: `nikola auto -b` or use `nikola serve -p 9000 -b` for different port

## To add a language of examples

1. Copy one of the existing `render_*_examples.py` and `render_*_examples.plugin`
2. Add the source folder as the key and destination folder to the `EXAMPLES_FOLDERS` dictionary in `conf.py`
3. Edit the `render_*_examples.py` file to build the examples
4. See [this blog post](https://bryanwweber.com/writing/personal/2018/12/22/writing-task-plugins-for-nikola/) for more information about building Nikola tasks

## To add an example category for Jupyter or Python

1. New example categories are stored in folders in the Jupyter and Python example repositories
2. If new categories (folders) are added to the examples, the appropriate renderer needs to be updated
3. In the Jupyter and Python examples, there's a dictionary called `*_headers`. Each folder of examples has a key in that dictionary. The values are a nested dictionary with three keys:
   1. `name`: The name used on the index page for that category
   2. `files`: An empty list that gets filled with the names of the examples in this category
   3. `summaries`: A empty dictionary that gets filled with keys that are the example filename and values that are the summary from that example
4. Add a new key to that dictionary with the folder name as the key and fill in the `name` key in the nested dictionary and set the `files` and `summaries` keys to the empty list and empty dictionary, respectively

## To add a version's release notes

* To add the latest version's release notes: `nikola new_release`
* To add release notes for a version by its tag name: `nikola new_release -t {tag_name}`
    - Example: `nikola new_release -t v2.4.0`
* To add release notes for a version by its release ID: `nikola new_release -i {id}`
    - Example: `nikola new_release -i 12508904`

## Cheat sheet for linking to content in various places:
* To link to another section on the same page (using the title of the section):
    `Governing Equations for Single Reactors`_
* To link to an external site:
  * `YAML 1.2 <https://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html>`__
* To link to a Python class:
  * :py:class:`ConstPressureReactor`
* To link to a C++ class:
  * `ThermoPhase <{{% ct_docs doxygen/html/dc/d38/classCantera_1_1ThermoPhase.html %}}>`__
* To link to an example:
  * `IC engine example </examples/python/reactors/ic_engine.py.html>`__
* To link to a label in the YAML API docs:
  * :ref:`three-body <sec-yaml-three-body>`
* To link to a class defined in `ctml_writer`:
  * :cti:class:`falloff_reaction`
