doc/sphinx/about.rst, before:

.. _sec-about:

*************
About Cantera
*************

Cantera is an open source scientific computing project, that allows users to
quickly and efficiently incorporate and execute fundamental thermodynamic,
chemical kinetic, and species transport calculations in their work. This can be
achieved by standalone command-line calls to core Cantera functions,
incorporating these calls into bespoke code or software, or by using any of the
solvers or examples distributed with the Cantera software package.

Cantera was originally started by Prof. David G. Goodwin at the California
Institute of Technology. Building on Prof. Goodwin's legacy, Cantera is licensed
under a permissive 3-Clause BSD license, ensuring that the software will remain
available for all to use.

Cantera is developed openly on GitHub. Contributions are welcomed from anyone in
the community; please see the `Contributors guide
<https://github.com/Cantera/cantera/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md>`_ for
assistance in getting started.

All online and in-person interactions and communications related to Cantera are
governed by the `Cantera Code of Conduct
<https://github.com/Cantera/cantera/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md>`_. This code
of conduct sets expectations for the community to ensure that users and
contributors are able to participate in a respectful and welcoming environment.

Steering Committee
==================

The role of the steering committee is to ensure the long-term health of the
Cantera project. This includes overseeing the development of the Cantera code
and community in a way that most benefits the entire community of users and
contributors. The steering committee can be contacted at `steering@cantera.org
<mailto:steering@cantera.org>`_ The current steering committee (in alphabetical
order) is:

    * Steven Decaluwe, Colorado School of Mines
    * \C. Franklin Goldsmith, Brown University
    * Kyle Niemeyer, Oregon State University
    * Raymond Speth, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
    * Bryan Weber, University of Connecticut
    * Richard West, Northeastern University

Donations
=========

Cantera is a fiscally sponsored project of NumFOCUS, a 501(c)3 nonprofit
dedicated to supporting the open source scientific computing community. If you
have found Cantera to be useful to your research or company, please consider
making a `donation <https://www.flipcause.com/secure/cause_pdetails/Mjk3MjU=>`_
to support our efforts. All donations will be used exclusively to fund the
development of Cantera's source code, documentation, or community.

.. image:: /_static/images/SponsoredProject.png
    :alt: Powered by NumFOCUS
    :target: https://numfocus.org
    :align: center
    :scale: 50%

.. raw:: html

    <div style="text-align:center">
    <a href="https://www.flipcause.com/secure/cause_pdetails/Mjk3MjU=" class="button">Donate to Cantera</a>
    </div>

Commit message:

Move citation information out of FAQ to About page

doc/sphinx/about.rst, after:

.. _sec-about:

*************
About Cantera
*************

Cantera is an open source scientific computing project, that allows users to
quickly and efficiently incorporate and execute fundamental thermodynamic,
chemical kinetic, and species transport calculations in their work. This can be
achieved by standalone command-line calls to core Cantera functions,
incorporating these calls into bespoke code or software, or by using any of the
solvers or examples distributed with the Cantera software package.

Cantera was originally started by Prof. David G. Goodwin at the California
Institute of Technology. Building on Prof. Goodwin's legacy, Cantera is licensed
under a permissive 3-Clause BSD license, ensuring that the software will remain
available for all to use.

Cantera is developed openly on GitHub. Contributions are welcomed from anyone in
the community; please see the `Contributors guide
<https://github.com/Cantera/cantera/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md>`_ for
assistance in getting started.

All online and in-person interactions and communications related to Cantera are
governed by the `Cantera Code of Conduct
<https://github.com/Cantera/cantera/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md>`_. This code
of conduct sets expectations for the community to ensure that users and
contributors are able to participate in a respectful and welcoming environment.

Steering Committee
==================

The role of the steering committee is to ensure the long-term health of the
Cantera project. This includes overseeing the development of the Cantera code
and community in a way that most benefits the entire community of users and
contributors. The steering committee can be contacted at `steering@cantera.org
<mailto:steering@cantera.org>`_ The current steering committee (in alphabetical
order) is:

    * Steven Decaluwe, Colorado School of Mines
    * \C. Franklin Goldsmith, Brown University
    * Kyle Niemeyer, Oregon State University
    * Raymond Speth, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
    * Bryan Weber, University of Connecticut
    * Richard West, Northeastern University

Citing Cantera
==============

If you use Cantera in a publication, we would appreciate if you cited the
version of Cantera that you used. This helps to improve the reproducibility of
your work, as well as giving credit to the many `authors
<https://github.com/Cantera/cantera/blob/master/AUTHORS>`_ who have contributed
their time to developing Cantera. The recommended citation for Cantera is as
follows:

    David G. Goodwin, Harry K. Moffat, and Raymond L. Speth. *Cantera: An object-
    oriented software toolkit for chemical kinetics, thermodynamics, and
    transport processes*. http://www.cantera.org, 2017. Version 2.3.0.
    doi:10.5281/zenodo.170284

The following BibTeX entry may also be used::

    @misc{cantera,
       author = "David G. Goodwin and Harry K. Moffat and Raymond L. Speth",
       title = "Cantera: An Object-oriented Software Toolkit for Chemical
                Kinetics, Thermodynamics, and Transport Processes",
       year = 2017,
       note = "Version 2.3.0",
       howpublished = "\url{http://www.cantera.org}",
       doi = {10.5281/zenodo.170284}
    }

If you are using a different version of Cantera, update the ``version`` and
``year`` fields accordingly.

Donations
=========

Cantera is a fiscally sponsored project of NumFOCUS, a 501(c)3 nonprofit
dedicated to supporting the open source scientific computing community. If you
have found Cantera to be useful to your research or company, please consider
making a `donation <https://www.flipcause.com/secure/cause_pdetails/Mjk3MjU=>`_
to support our efforts. All donations will be used exclusively to fund the
development of Cantera's source code, documentation, or community.

.. image:: /_static/images/SponsoredProject.png
    :alt: Powered by NumFOCUS
    :target: https://numfocus.org
    :align: center
    :scale: 50%

.. raw:: html

    <div style="text-align:center">
    <a href="https://www.flipcause.com/secure/cause_pdetails/Mjk3MjU=" class="button">Donate to Cantera</a>
    </div>
