doc/sphinx/install.rst, before:

.. _sec-install:

******************
Installing Cantera
******************

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. _sec-install-win:

Windows
=======

Windows installers are provided for stable versions of Cantera. These
installation instructions are for Cantera 2.1.1.

1. **Choose your Python version and architecture**

   - On Windows, Cantera supports Python 2.7 and Python 3.3. Python 3.3 is
     recommended unless you need to use legacy code that does not work with
     Python 3. You can install both Cantera Python modules simultaneously.

   - Cantera supports both 32- and 64- bit Python installations.

   - You need choose the matching Cantera installer for your Python version and
     machine architecture.

   - The rest of these instructions will refer to your chosen version of Python
     as *X.Y*.

   - If you are using Matlab, you must use the same architecture for Cantera and
     Matlab. Matlab defaults to 64-bit if you are running a 64-bit operating
     system.

2. **Install Python**

   - Go to `python.org <https://www.python.org/>`_.

     - *64-bit*: Download the most recent "Windows X86-64 MSI Installer" for
       Python *X.Y* (i.e. prefer 3.3.5 to 3.3.4, but not 3.4.1).
     - *32-bit*: Download the most recent "Windows x86 MSI Installer" for
       Python *X.Y*.

   - Run the installer. The default installation options should be fine.

   - Python is required in order to work with `.cti` input files even if you are
     not using the Python interface to Cantera.

   - Cantera can also be used with alternative Python distributions such as
     `Anaconda <https://store.continuum.io/cshop/anaconda/>`_ or the Enthought
     `Canopy <https://www.enthought.com/products/canopy/>`_ distribution. These
     distributions will generally be based on the 64-bit version of Python 2.7,
     and will include Numpy as well as many other packages useful for scientific
     users.

3. **Install pip**

   - Go to the `pip installation instructions
     <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/installing.html#install-pip>`_ and download
     `get-pip.py` (You may need to right click the link and select *Save target
     as...*).

   - From a administrative command prompt, run `get-pip.py` with the copy of
     Python you plan on use with Cantera, e.g.::

         c:\python33\python.exe "%USERPROFILE%\Downloads\get-pip.py"

4. **Install Numpy**

   - Go to the `Unofficial Windows Binaries for Python Extension Packages page
     <http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#numpy>`_.

   - Download the most recent release (distributed as a "wheel" archive) of the
     1.x series for Python *X.Y* that matches your Python architecture. The
     binaries for Cantera 2.1.1 require Numpy 1.8.0 or newer, e.g. In the
     filename, the digits after "cp" indicate the Python version, e.g.
     ``numpy‑1.8.2+mkl‑cp33‑none‑win_amd64.whl`` is the installer for 64-bit
     Python 3.3.

   - From an administrative command prompt, install the downloaded wheel using
     pip, e.g.::

         c:\python33\scripts\pip.exe install "%USERPROFILE%\Downloads\numpy‑1.8.2+mkl‑cp33‑none‑win_amd64.whl"

5. **Remove old versions of Cantera**

   - Use The Windows "Add/Remove Programs" interface

   - Remove both the main Cantera package and the Python module.

   - The Python module will be listed as "Python *X.Y* Cantera ..."

6. **Install Cantera**

   - Go to the `Cantera Downloads
     <https://sourceforge.net/projects/cantera/files/cantera/2.1.1/>`_ page.

     - *64-bit*: Download **Cantera-2.1.1-x64.msi** and
       **Cantera-Python-2.1.1-x64-pyX.Y.msi**.
     - *32-bit*: Download **Cantera-2.1.1-x86.msi** and
       **Cantera-Python-2.1.1-x86-pyX.Y.msi**.

   - If you are only using the Python module, you do not need to download and
     install the base package.

   - Run the installer(s).

7. **Configure Matlab** (optional)

   - Set the environment variable ``PYTHON_CMD``

     - From the *Start* menu (Windows 7) or the *Start* screen (Windows 8) type
       "edit environment" and select "Edit environment variables for your
       account".
     - Add a *New* variable with ``PYTHON_CMD`` as the *name* and the full path
       to the Python executable (e.g. ``C:\python27\python.exe``) as the
       *value*.
     - Setting ``PYTHON_CMD`` is not necessary if the path to ``python.exe`` is
       in your ``PATH`` (which can be set from the same configuration dialog).

   - Launch Matlab

   - Go to *File->Set Path...*

   - Select *Add with Subfolders*

   - Browse to the folder ``C:\Program Files\Cantera\matlab\toolbox``

   - Select *Save*, then *Close*.

8. **Test the installation**

   - Python::

         import cantera
         gas = cantera.Solution('gri30.cti')
         h2o = cantera.PureFluid('liquidvapor.cti', 'water')

   - Matlab::

         gas = IdealGasMix('gri30.cti')
         h2o = importPhase('liquidvapor.cti','water')

.. _sec-install-osx:

Mac OS X
========

Cantera can be installed on OS X using either Homebrew or MacPorts. With
Homebrew, the current stable, maintenance, or development versions of Cantera
can be installed, and both the Python 2.7 and Python 3.x modules are available,
as well as the Matlab toolbox. The MacPorts portfile supports the current stable
version of Cantera and builds the Python 2.7 module.

Homebrew
---------
These instructions have been tested on Mac OS X 10.9 (Mavericks) with Xcode 5.1
and Mac OS X 10.10 (Yosemite) with Xcode 6.1. If you've used Homebrew before,
you can skip any steps which have already been completed.

1. **Install Xcode and Homebrew**

   - Install Xcode from the App Store

   - From a Terminal, run::

         sudo xcode-select --install
         sudo xcodebuild -license

     and agree to the Xcode license agreement.

   - Install `Homebrew <http://brew.sh/>`_ by running the following command in a
     Terminal::

         ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"

2. **Set up the compilation environment**

   - Run the following commands::

         brew tap homebrew/science
         brew update
         brew install python scons sundials

   - Verify that your path is set up to use Homebrew's version of Python by
     running::

         which python

     If this command does not print ``/usr/local/bin/python``, add the following
     to ``~/.bash_profile`` (creating this file if it doesn't already exist; you
     can use the command line editor ``nano`` to edit this file)::

         export PATH=/usr/local/bin:$PATH

     and then run::

         source ~/.bash_profile

   - Install Python packages required to compile Cantera by running::

         pip install cython numpy

     Note that these packages are required even if you do not plan on using the
     Cantera Python 2 module.

   - If you want to build the Cantera Python 3 module, run::

         brew install python3
         pip3 install numpy cython

3. **Compile and install Cantera**

   * To compile and install Cantera using the default configuration, run::

         brew install cantera

   * The following options are supported:

     ``--devel``
         Installs Cantera with additional patches that will be included in the
         next maintenance release.

     ``--HEAD``
         Installs the current development version of Cantera.

     ``--with-matlab=/Applications/MATLAB_R2014a.app/``
         Installs the Matlab toolbox (with the path modified to match your
         installed Matlab version)

   * These options are specified as additional arguments to the ``brew install``
     command, e.g.::

         brew install cantera --devel --with-matlab=/Applications/MATLAB_R2014a.app/

4. **Test Cantera Installation (Python)**

   * The Python examples will be installed in::

         /usr/local/lib/pythonX.Y/site-packages/cantera/examples/

     where ``X.Y`` is your Python version, e.g. ``2.7``.

   * You may find it convenient to copy the examples to your Desktop::

         cp -r /usr/local/lib/python2.7/site-packages/cantera/examples ~/Desktop/cantera_examples

   * To run an example::

         cd cantera_examples/reactors
         python reactor1.py

5. **Test Cantera Installation (Matlab)**

   * The Matlab toolbox, if enabled, will be installed in::

         /usr/local/lib/cantera/matlab

   * To use the Cantera Matlab toolbox, run the following commands in Matlab
     (each time you start Matlab), or add them to a ``startup.m`` file located
     in ``/Users/$USER/Documents/MATLAB``, where ``$USER`` is your username::

         addpath(genpath('/usr/local/lib/cantera/matlab'))
         setenv('PYTHON_CMD', '/usr/local/bin/python')

   * The Matlab examples will be installed in::

         /usr/local/share/cantera/samples/matlab

   * You may find it convenient to copy the examples to your user directory::

         cp -r /usr/local/share/cantera/samples/matlab ~/Documents/MATLAB/cantera_examples

MacPorts
--------

If you have MacPorts installed (see https://www.macports.org/install.php), you
can install Cantera by executing::

    sudo port install cantera

from the command line. All dependencies will be installed automatically.

MacPorts installs its own Python interpreter. Be sure to be actually using it by
checking::

    sudo port select python python27

.. _sec-install-ubuntu:

Ubuntu
======

Ubuntu packages are provided for recent versions of Ubuntu using a Personal
Package Archive (PPA). As of Cantera 2.1.2, packages are available for Ubuntu
12.04 LTS (Precise Pangolin), Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (Trusty Tahr), and Ubuntu 14.10
(Utopic Unicorn). To see which Ubuntu releases and Cantera versions are
currently available, visit https://launchpad.net/~speth/+archive/ubuntu/cantera

The available packages are:

- ``cantera-python`` - The Cantera Python module for Python 2. For Ubuntu 12.04,
  this is the "legacy" Python module. For Ubuntu 14.04 and newer, this is the
  "new" Python module.

- ``cantera-python3`` - The Cantera Python module for Python 3. Only available
  for Ubuntu 14.04 and newer.

- ``cantera-dev`` - Libraries and header files for compiling your own C++ and
  Fortran 90 programs that use Cantera.

To add the Cantera PPA::

    sudo aptitude install python-software-properties
    sudo apt-add-repository ppa:speth/cantera
    sudo aptitude update

To install all of the Cantera packages::

    sudo aptitude install cantera-python cantera-python3 cantera-dev

or install whichever subset you need by adjusting the above command.

Commit message:

Mention '-v' flag to 'brew install' as a debugging tool

doc/sphinx/install.rst, after:

.. _sec-install:

******************
Installing Cantera
******************

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. _sec-install-win:

Windows
=======

Windows installers are provided for stable versions of Cantera. These
installation instructions are for Cantera 2.1.1.

1. **Choose your Python version and architecture**

   - On Windows, Cantera supports Python 2.7 and Python 3.3. Python 3.3 is
     recommended unless you need to use legacy code that does not work with
     Python 3. You can install both Cantera Python modules simultaneously.

   - Cantera supports both 32- and 64- bit Python installations.

   - You need choose the matching Cantera installer for your Python version and
     machine architecture.

   - The rest of these instructions will refer to your chosen version of Python
     as *X.Y*.

   - If you are using Matlab, you must use the same architecture for Cantera and
     Matlab. Matlab defaults to 64-bit if you are running a 64-bit operating
     system.

2. **Install Python**

   - Go to `python.org <https://www.python.org/>`_.

     - *64-bit*: Download the most recent "Windows X86-64 MSI Installer" for
       Python *X.Y* (i.e. prefer 3.3.5 to 3.3.4, but not 3.4.1).
     - *32-bit*: Download the most recent "Windows x86 MSI Installer" for
       Python *X.Y*.

   - Run the installer. The default installation options should be fine.

   - Python is required in order to work with `.cti` input files even if you are
     not using the Python interface to Cantera.

   - Cantera can also be used with alternative Python distributions such as
     `Anaconda <https://store.continuum.io/cshop/anaconda/>`_ or the Enthought
     `Canopy <https://www.enthought.com/products/canopy/>`_ distribution. These
     distributions will generally be based on the 64-bit version of Python 2.7,
     and will include Numpy as well as many other packages useful for scientific
     users.

3. **Install pip**

   - Go to the `pip installation instructions
     <https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/installing.html#install-pip>`_ and download
     `get-pip.py` (You may need to right click the link and select *Save target
     as...*).

   - From a administrative command prompt, run `get-pip.py` with the copy of
     Python you plan on use with Cantera, e.g.::

         c:\python33\python.exe "%USERPROFILE%\Downloads\get-pip.py"

4. **Install Numpy**

   - Go to the `Unofficial Windows Binaries for Python Extension Packages page
     <http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#numpy>`_.

   - Download the most recent release (distributed as a "wheel" archive) of the
     1.x series for Python *X.Y* that matches your Python architecture. The
     binaries for Cantera 2.1.1 require Numpy 1.8.0 or newer, e.g. In the
     filename, the digits after "cp" indicate the Python version, e.g.
     ``numpy‑1.8.2+mkl‑cp33‑none‑win_amd64.whl`` is the installer for 64-bit
     Python 3.3.

   - From an administrative command prompt, install the downloaded wheel using
     pip, e.g.::

         c:\python33\scripts\pip.exe install "%USERPROFILE%\Downloads\numpy‑1.8.2+mkl‑cp33‑none‑win_amd64.whl"

5. **Remove old versions of Cantera**

   - Use The Windows "Add/Remove Programs" interface

   - Remove both the main Cantera package and the Python module.

   - The Python module will be listed as "Python *X.Y* Cantera ..."

6. **Install Cantera**

   - Go to the `Cantera Downloads
     <https://sourceforge.net/projects/cantera/files/cantera/2.1.1/>`_ page.

     - *64-bit*: Download **Cantera-2.1.1-x64.msi** and
       **Cantera-Python-2.1.1-x64-pyX.Y.msi**.
     - *32-bit*: Download **Cantera-2.1.1-x86.msi** and
       **Cantera-Python-2.1.1-x86-pyX.Y.msi**.

   - If you are only using the Python module, you do not need to download and
     install the base package.

   - Run the installer(s).

7. **Configure Matlab** (optional)

   - Set the environment variable ``PYTHON_CMD``

     - From the *Start* menu (Windows 7) or the *Start* screen (Windows 8) type
       "edit environment" and select "Edit environment variables for your
       account".
     - Add a *New* variable with ``PYTHON_CMD`` as the *name* and the full path
       to the Python executable (e.g. ``C:\python27\python.exe``) as the
       *value*.
     - Setting ``PYTHON_CMD`` is not necessary if the path to ``python.exe`` is
       in your ``PATH`` (which can be set from the same configuration dialog).

   - Launch Matlab

   - Go to *File->Set Path...*

   - Select *Add with Subfolders*

   - Browse to the folder ``C:\Program Files\Cantera\matlab\toolbox``

   - Select *Save*, then *Close*.

8. **Test the installation**

   - Python::

         import cantera
         gas = cantera.Solution('gri30.cti')
         h2o = cantera.PureFluid('liquidvapor.cti', 'water')

   - Matlab::

         gas = IdealGasMix('gri30.cti')
         h2o = importPhase('liquidvapor.cti','water')

.. _sec-install-osx:

Mac OS X
========

Cantera can be installed on OS X using either Homebrew or MacPorts. With
Homebrew, the current stable, maintenance, or development versions of Cantera
can be installed, and both the Python 2.7 and Python 3.x modules are available,
as well as the Matlab toolbox. The MacPorts portfile supports the current stable
version of Cantera and builds the Python 2.7 module.

Homebrew
---------
These instructions have been tested on Mac OS X 10.9 (Mavericks) with Xcode 5.1
and Mac OS X 10.10 (Yosemite) with Xcode 6.1. If you've used Homebrew before,
you can skip any steps which have already been completed.

1. **Install Xcode and Homebrew**

   - Install Xcode from the App Store

   - From a Terminal, run::

         sudo xcode-select --install
         sudo xcodebuild -license

     and agree to the Xcode license agreement.

   - Install `Homebrew <http://brew.sh/>`_ by running the following command in a
     Terminal::

         ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install)"

2. **Set up the compilation environment**

   - Run the following commands::

         brew tap homebrew/science
         brew update
         brew install python scons sundials

   - Verify that your path is set up to use Homebrew's version of Python by
     running::

         which python

     If this command does not print ``/usr/local/bin/python``, add the following
     to ``~/.bash_profile`` (creating this file if it doesn't already exist; you
     can use the command line editor ``nano`` to edit this file)::

         export PATH=/usr/local/bin:$PATH

     and then run::

         source ~/.bash_profile

   - Install Python packages required to compile Cantera by running::

         pip install cython numpy

     Note that these packages are required even if you do not plan on using the
     Cantera Python 2 module.

   - If you want to build the Cantera Python 3 module, run::

         brew install python3
         pip3 install numpy cython

3. **Compile and install Cantera**

   * To compile and install Cantera using the default configuration, run::

         brew install cantera

   * The following options are supported:

     ``--devel``
         Installs Cantera with additional patches that will be included in the
         next maintenance release.

     ``--HEAD``
         Installs the current development version of Cantera.

     ``--with-matlab=/Applications/MATLAB_R2014a.app/``
         Installs the Matlab toolbox (with the path modified to match your
         installed Matlab version)

   * These options are specified as additional arguments to the ``brew install``
     command, e.g.::

         brew install cantera --devel --with-matlab=/Applications/MATLAB_R2014a.app/

   * If something goes wrong with the Homebrew install, re-run the command with
     the ``-v`` flag to get more verbose output that may help identify the
     source of the problem::

         brew install -v cantera

4. **Test Cantera Installation (Python)**

   * The Python examples will be installed in::

         /usr/local/lib/pythonX.Y/site-packages/cantera/examples/

     where ``X.Y`` is your Python version, e.g. ``2.7``.

   * You may find it convenient to copy the examples to your Desktop::

         cp -r /usr/local/lib/python2.7/site-packages/cantera/examples ~/Desktop/cantera_examples

   * To run an example::

         cd cantera_examples/reactors
         python reactor1.py

5. **Test Cantera Installation (Matlab)**

   * The Matlab toolbox, if enabled, will be installed in::

         /usr/local/lib/cantera/matlab

   * To use the Cantera Matlab toolbox, run the following commands in Matlab
     (each time you start Matlab), or add them to a ``startup.m`` file located
     in ``/Users/$USER/Documents/MATLAB``, where ``$USER`` is your username::

         addpath(genpath('/usr/local/lib/cantera/matlab'))
         setenv('PYTHON_CMD', '/usr/local/bin/python')

   * The Matlab examples will be installed in::

         /usr/local/share/cantera/samples/matlab

   * You may find it convenient to copy the examples to your user directory::

         cp -r /usr/local/share/cantera/samples/matlab ~/Documents/MATLAB/cantera_examples

MacPorts
--------

If you have MacPorts installed (see https://www.macports.org/install.php), you
can install Cantera by executing::

    sudo port install cantera

from the command line. All dependencies will be installed automatically.

MacPorts installs its own Python interpreter. Be sure to be actually using it by
checking::

    sudo port select python python27

.. _sec-install-ubuntu:

Ubuntu
======

Ubuntu packages are provided for recent versions of Ubuntu using a Personal
Package Archive (PPA). As of Cantera 2.1.2, packages are available for Ubuntu
12.04 LTS (Precise Pangolin), Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (Trusty Tahr), and Ubuntu 14.10
(Utopic Unicorn). To see which Ubuntu releases and Cantera versions are
currently available, visit https://launchpad.net/~speth/+archive/ubuntu/cantera

The available packages are:

- ``cantera-python`` - The Cantera Python module for Python 2. For Ubuntu 12.04,
  this is the "legacy" Python module. For Ubuntu 14.04 and newer, this is the
  "new" Python module.

- ``cantera-python3`` - The Cantera Python module for Python 3. Only available
  for Ubuntu 14.04 and newer.

- ``cantera-dev`` - Libraries and header files for compiling your own C++ and
  Fortran 90 programs that use Cantera.

To add the Cantera PPA::

    sudo aptitude install python-software-properties
    sudo apt-add-repository ppa:speth/cantera
    sudo aptitude update

To install all of the Cantera packages::

    sudo aptitude install cantera-python cantera-python3 cantera-dev

or install whichever subset you need by adjusting the above command.
