pages/tutorials/cxx-guide/simple-example.rst, before:

.. title: A Very Simple C++ Program

.. _sec-cxx-simple-example:

.. jumbotron::

   .. raw:: html

      <h1 class="display-3">A Very Simple C++ Program</h1>

   .. class:: lead

      How to build a simple C++ program using Cantera objects

A short C++ program that uses Cantera is shown below. This program reads in a
specification of a gas mixture from an input file, and then builds a new object
representing the mixture. It then sets the thermodynamic state and composition
of the gas mixture, and prints out a summary of its properties.

..
   TODO: Update example to use "core.h" after release of Cantera 3.0

.. include:: pages/tutorials/cxx-guide/demo1a.cpp
   :code: c++

Before you can run this program, it first needs to be compiled. On a Linux
system using the GCC compiler, a typical command line for compiling this program
might look like this:

.. code:: bash

   g++ combustor.cpp -o combustor -pthread -O3 -std=c++11 \
   -I/opt/cantera-2.5.1/include -L/opt/cantera-2.5.1/lib \
   -lcantera -lsundials_cvodes -lsundials_ida -lsundials_nvecserial -lfmt -lyaml-cpp

The locations of the Cantera header files (specified by the ``-I`` option) and the
libraries (specified by the ``-L`` option) will vary depending on where you
installed Cantera, and the list of libraries (such as ``sundials_cvodes``) will
vary depending on what options you used when compiling Cantera. For more
advanced and flexible methods of compiling programs which use the Cantera C++
library, see :doc:`compiling`.

This program produces the output below::

          temperature             500  K
             pressure          202650  Pa
              density        0.361163  kg/m^3
     mean mol. weight         7.40903  amu

                             1 kg            1 kmol
                          -----------      ------------
             enthalpy    -2.47725e+06       -1.835e+07     J
      internal energy    -3.03836e+06       -2.251e+07     J
              entropy         20700.1        1.534e+05     J/K
       Gibbs function    -1.28273e+07       -9.504e+07     J
    heat capacity c_p         3919.29        2.904e+04     J/K
    heat capacity c_v         2797.09        2.072e+04     J/K

                              X                 Y          Chem. Pot. / RT
                        -------------     ------------     ------------
                   H2            0.8         0.217667         -15.6441
                    H              0                0
                    O              0                0
                   O2              0                0
                   OH              0                0
                  H2O            0.1         0.243153         -82.9531
                  HO2              0                0
                 H2O2              0                0
                   AR            0.1          0.53918         -20.5027

As C++ programs go, this one is *very* short. It is the Cantera equivalent of
the "Hello, World" program most programming textbooks begin with. But it
illustrates some important points in writing Cantera C++ programs.

Catching `CanteraError`_ exceptions
===================================

The entire body of the program is put inside a function that is invoked within
a ``try`` block in the main program. In this way, exceptions thrown in the
function or in any procedure it calls may be caught. In this program, a
``catch`` block is defined for exceptions of type `CanteraError`_. Cantera
throws exceptions of this type, so it is always a good idea to catch them.

The ``report`` function
=======================

The ``report`` function generates a nicely-formatted report of the properties of
a phase, including its composition in both mole (X) and mass (Y) units. For
each species present, the non-dimensional chemical potential is also printed.
This is handy particularly when doing equilibrium calculations. This function
is very useful to see at a glance the state of some phase.

.. _CanteraError: {{% ct_docs doxygen/html/db/ddf/classCantera_1_1CanteraError.html %}}

.. container:: container

   .. container:: row

      .. container:: col-4 text-left

         .. container:: btn btn-primary
            :tagname: a
            :attributes: href=headers.html
                         title="C++ Header Files"

            Previous: C++ Header Files

      .. container:: col-4 text-center

         .. container:: btn btn-primary
            :tagname: a
            :attributes: href=index.html
                         title="C++ Interface Tutorial"

            Return: C++ Interface Tutorial

      .. container:: col-4 text-right

         .. container:: btn btn-primary
            :tagname: a
            :attributes: href=thermo.html
                         title="Computing Properties"

            Next: Computing Properties

Commit message:

Simplify basic compiler command example
Don't recommend a full manual compiler command line, especially when
it isn't likely to be correct for any specific use case.

Fixes #228

pages/tutorials/cxx-guide/simple-example.rst, after:

.. title: A Very Simple C++ Program

.. _sec-cxx-simple-example:

.. jumbotron::

   .. raw:: html

      <h1 class="display-3">A Very Simple C++ Program</h1>

   .. class:: lead

      How to build a simple C++ program using Cantera objects

A short C++ program that uses Cantera is shown below. This program reads in a
specification of a gas mixture from an input file, and then builds a new object
representing the mixture. It then sets the thermodynamic state and composition
of the gas mixture, and prints out a summary of its properties.

..
   TODO: Update example to use "core.h" after release of Cantera 3.0

.. include:: pages/tutorials/cxx-guide/demo1a.cpp
   :code: c++

Before you can run this program, it first needs to be compiled. On a Linux
system using the GCC compiler, a typical command line for compiling this program
might look like this:

.. code:: bash

   g++ combustor.cpp -o combustor -O3 $(pkg-config --cflags --libs cantera)

This example relies on the `pkg-config` tool to determine the appropriate compiler
flags, such as those specifying the Cantera header and library files. For more advanced
and flexible methods of compiling programs that use the Cantera C++ library, see
:doc:`compiling`.

This program produces the output below::

          temperature             500  K
             pressure          202650  Pa
              density        0.361163  kg/m^3
     mean mol. weight         7.40903  amu

                             1 kg            1 kmol
                          -----------      ------------
             enthalpy    -2.47725e+06       -1.835e+07     J
      internal energy    -3.03836e+06       -2.251e+07     J
              entropy         20700.1        1.534e+05     J/K
       Gibbs function    -1.28273e+07       -9.504e+07     J
    heat capacity c_p         3919.29        2.904e+04     J/K
    heat capacity c_v         2797.09        2.072e+04     J/K

                              X                 Y          Chem. Pot. / RT
                        -------------     ------------     ------------
                   H2            0.8         0.217667         -15.6441
                    H              0                0
                    O              0                0
                   O2              0                0
                   OH              0                0
                  H2O            0.1         0.243153         -82.9531
                  HO2              0                0
                 H2O2              0                0
                   AR            0.1          0.53918         -20.5027

As C++ programs go, this one is *very* short. It is the Cantera equivalent of
the "Hello, World" program most programming textbooks begin with. But it
illustrates some important points in writing Cantera C++ programs.

Catching `CanteraError`_ exceptions
===================================

The entire body of the program is put inside a function that is invoked within
a ``try`` block in the main program. In this way, exceptions thrown in the
function or in any procedure it calls may be caught. In this program, a
``catch`` block is defined for exceptions of type `CanteraError`_. Cantera
throws exceptions of this type, so it is always a good idea to catch them.

The ``report`` function
=======================

The ``report`` function generates a nicely-formatted report of the properties of
a phase, including its composition in both mole (X) and mass (Y) units. For
each species present, the non-dimensional chemical potential is also printed.
This is handy particularly when doing equilibrium calculations. This function
is very useful to see at a glance the state of some phase.

.. _CanteraError: {{% ct_docs doxygen/html/db/ddf/classCantera_1_1CanteraError.html %}}

.. container:: container

   .. container:: row

      .. container:: col-4 text-left

         .. container:: btn btn-primary
            :tagname: a
            :attributes: href=headers.html
                         title="C++ Header Files"

            Previous: C++ Header Files

      .. container:: col-4 text-center

         .. container:: btn btn-primary
            :tagname: a
            :attributes: href=index.html
                         title="C++ Interface Tutorial"

            Return: C++ Interface Tutorial

      .. container:: col-4 text-right

         .. container:: btn btn-primary
            :tagname: a
            :attributes: href=thermo.html
                         title="Computing Properties"

            Next: Computing Properties
